---
title: "On authority in the Voluntary Carbon Markets and ICVCM"
description: "authority in the Voluntary Carbon Markets and ICVCM"
tags: Carbon_Market 
---

## On authority in the Voluntary Carbon Markets and ICVCM

Authority is not awarded, it is claimed. In no other space does does this truth bare out more vividly then the Voluntary Carbon Markets. As the sun set on the Clean Development Mechanism, several new organizations have risen in its stead proposing their frameworks to lay claim to authority. It positions such organizations in an advantageous manner - as it cleverly shifts the burden of proof on the actors below them over whom they claim authority, who now have to compete with others in complying with complex mesh of rules to earn perception of reputation. Perception of reputation comes by exclusivity of labels that organization invents and then rewards to the actors below them who are compliant. And if you have the power to bestow a perception of reputation over someone, if you can stand and judge someone else, you hold power over them. In Voluntary Carbon Markets, anyone who has the connections, know the jargon and knowledge structure enough can just claim this authority. This is not a criticism - authority and judgement in a space as hypocritical as Sustainability is a necessity. But there are two interesting factors to think about. The rules set by these bodies are fair. They seek to balance the adoption of climate action at scale and scientific rigor at the same time. However, there are two factors interesting to discuss here.

First - that since the market is supposed to be a level playing field, there can be a greater diversity in organizations claiming authority. The Clean Development Mechanism was operated by United Nation's UNFCCC. It is no surprise that almost all standard organizations emerged after the demise of CDM are western - based in either US, UK or Switzerland - who claim authority to judge Validation and Verification Bodies that tend to be from the Global South (or when headquartered in the Global North often hire people from the Global South to perform checks on activities most often in the developing world). While it can be effectively argued that the VVBs are based very internationally, the Global South has definitely lagged behind in laying claim to authority as a Standard Body. The Global Carbon Council **xxxaddlinkxxx** is the only standard body laying this claim from the Global South (Qatar) and since they have emerged relatively recently, they still have catching up to do. The Global South often lags behind the west who are quicker in organizing institutions that can lay claims authority and promote their values to be universal templates to be adopted. A challenge from Dharmic perspective is still to be leveled.

Second - the incentive propels organizations to keep creating parenting organization that can claim even more authority over others. As it stands now, the authority is claimed at the following levels.
**xxxaddgraphicxxx**
The VVB have authority to judge activities of project developer.  Although paid by the project developer, they are the sepoys of the Standard bodies who validate and verify that the project developer's action comply with the principles as dictated by the Standard body that is claiming authority. The Standard Bodies have authority over the VVB to judge how well the VVB is complying to their rules, methods and principles. And the "Integrity Council for the Voluntary Carbon Market" (ICVCM) has emerged to judge the different Standard Bodies and determine if the standard bodies comply to the principles that ICVCM has set out. ICVCM emerged out of the Taskforce on Scaling the Voluntary Carbon Markets (TSVCM)[[1]](#1).

ICVCM is the present day equivalent of CDM's Executive Board. It is the sole organization that claims authority over Standard Bodies. ICVCM is also a western organization - with administrative and governance in the UK. Their aim is to exert power over Standard Bodies the same way Standard Bodies have exerted power - by inventing exclusive labels granted to the few who are compliant framework they claim to be robust. Those Standard who do not meet their requirements shall be labelled "not approved". Since this will take hit to the perception of reputation, the corresponding credit prices will tank. Make no mistake, the framework proposed by ICVCM indeed is robust, the point is that there is nothing stopping others to create bodies that can also claim robustness. And in case there are multiple bodies like ICVCM, there is nothing to stop perhaps an even more grand-parent organization that can assess these different ICVCM-like bodies. Will that happen? And will the Global South step up to create bodies claiming authority in the Voluntary Market Space?

### References and Footnotes
<a id="1">[1]</a> Interestingly the taskforce was initiated by Mark Carney - the current Prime Minister of Canada.